Features blog (#5629)
microsoft/vscode-docs: blogs/2022/09/15/dev-container-features.md

---
Order: 76
TOCTitle: Dev Container Features
PageTitle: Dev Container Features
MetaDescription: What are dev container Features and what's new
Date: 2022-09-15
Author: Brigit Murtaugh
---

> # Dev Container Features

Author: I debated about a compound title like that, or just `Dev Container Feature Packs`. I was leaning toward just `Dev Container Features` since features are the real star we're focused on, and "packs" are the mechanism to install them. What do you think?

> # Dev Container Features

Reviewer: Yeah - only reason I was wondering about it is the question as to whether people would interpret this title as features of Remote - Containers, which is partly why we're having the conversation about adding pack/package/bundle/etc to the end for the tgz.  We could adjust it to say something like "Publishing Dev Container Features" or "Custom Dev Container Features" something like that though which would probably clarify.

> # Dev Container Features

Author: I like `Custom Dev Container Features` - updated!

September 15, 2022 by Brigit Murtaugh, [@BrigitMurtaugh](https://twitter.com/BrigitMurtaugh)

We’ve all had that moment when setting up our development environment – "Oh, I just need one more thing!" – that "thing" being one more language or toolset (or maybe a few more 😊) to work on your project.

Development containers are a great way to simplify environment set up - they provide a full-featured coding environment with the tools your project needs. They’re configured using an image, Dockerfile, or Docker Compose file and `devcontainer.json`, which is a metadata format used to enrich containers with development specific content and settings.

> When creating a dev container, you may encounter the same "I just need one more thing!" – maybe you’re using a Node.js image in your Dockerfile and just need to add Git. Or maybe you need to add something more complex, like working with Docker or Kubernetes from within your dev container. Dev containers are great since anyone accessing your code will have the same, consistent experience with all those tools you added – but what’s the best way to add them?

Reviewer: Possible word tweak? The original sentence seemed to hang a bit.

```suggestion
When creating dev containers, you may have the same "I just need one more thing!" reaction repeatedly – maybe you’re using a Node.js image in your Dockerfile and just need to add Git. Or maybe you need to add something more complex, like working with Docker or Kubernetes from within your dev container. Dev containers are great since anyone accessing your code will have the same, consistent experience with all those tools you added – but what’s the best way to add them?
```

What if there was an easy way to install that extra tool in your dev container, simply by mentioning the tool’s name and version? Or what if as a tool user or author, you could create an easy way for others to install it? Sharing manual scripts can help with reuse, but when referencing one, you may forget to reference container or tooling settings, such as enabling ptrace support for Go, Rust, or C++ debugging, adding a specific entry point to fire on container start, or ensuring the right VS Code extensions are included.

We’re happy to share that dev container feature packs help you smoothly get the tools you need in your dev container!

> Feature packs are self-contained units of installation code, designed to install new features in your dev container atop a wide-range of base container images. As part of our work on the [open dev container specification](https://containers.dev/), we’ve made some improvements to where you can grab pre-created feature packs and how you can author and distribute your own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feature packs are self-contained units of installation code, container config, and/or settings and extensions designed to enable new development features in your dev container atop a wide-range of base container images. As part of our work on the [open dev container specification](https://containers.dev/), we’ve made some improvements to where you can grab pre-created feature packs and how you can author and distribute your own.
```

Author: What do you think about if we remove `atop a wide-range of base container images`, or make it into a second sentence? Feels like we want to be as clear and concise as possible in the initial definition.

Or what do you think about:

`Features are self-contained units of installation code, container config, and/or settings and extensions designed to enable new development features in your dev container. They're installed through feature packs and designed to install atop a wide-range of base container images.`

Reviewer: I like it! One tweak to avoid install being twice in a sentence:

`They're installed through feature packs which can be designed to work with a wide range of base container images.`

Author: I like it! Updating now.

> Features are self-contained units of installation code, container config, and/or settings and extensions designed to enable new development features in your dev container. They're installed through feature packs, which can be built to work with a wide range of base container images. As part of our work on the [open dev container specification](https://containers.dev/), we’ve made some improvements to where you can grab pre-created feature packs and how you can author and distribute your own.

Reviewer 2: The distinction between features and feature packs is subtle. Would always using "feature pack" work?

Reviewer: Yeah "Feature packs are..." probably makes more sense in this context since that's the self-contained unit that installs features.

Let’s see what’s new and how you can get started with features from any dev container supporting tool or service (like the [VS Code Remote - Containers extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers) or [GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces))!

> ## Using Features

Reviewer: Perhaps "Using Feature Packs?"  Or "Installing Features?"

Author: I thought the differentiation would be: 

- You install a feature pack
- You use a feature(s) from the pack

Sounds like you're thinking the opposite?

Reviewer: Yeah, that works too - but isn't this section focusing on "Installing feature packs" with that terminology? (Verses using them once installed?) Maybe that's the right heading then.

Author: I like `Adding features to your dev container` - updating now.

The example below installs the [go](https://github.com/devcontainers/features/tree/main/src/go) and [docker-in-docker](https://github.com/devcontainers/features/tree/main/src/docker-in-docker) features using these feature packs:

```json
"name": "my-project-devcontainer",
"image": "mcr.microsoft.com/devcontainers/base:ubuntu",
"features": {
    "ghcr.io/devcontainers/features/go:1": {
        "version": "1.18"
    },
    "ghcr.io/devcontainers/features/docker-in-docker:1": {
        "version": "latest",
        "moby": true
    }
}
```

You can also explore official and publicly contributed feature packs [on the spec site](https://containers.dev/features). Any feature pack can be added by editing `devcontainer.json`, and publicly published ones can be added through existing dev container configuration experiences (like what you’d see in the [VS Code Remote - Containers extension](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/containers#_dev-container-features-preview)).

> ![Spec site list of available feature packs](./site-feature-list.png)

Reviewer 3: Can you retake the image? It's low res and hard to read.

Author: Done! Sorry about that - it often loses quality it once had when I convert from Word to saving it as an image I can use in markdown.

> **Note:** You should be sure that feature packs you release publicly check and install dependencies in addition to the feature. Furthermore, public features are very likely to be used from both arm64 or x86_64 machines - so be sure to adapt to this when possible.

You may review `devcontainer-feature.json` properties [in the spec](https://containers.dev/implementors/features/#devcontainer-feature-json-properties), along with public examples in the [devcontainers/features](https://github.com/devcontainers/features) repo.

Now that we’ve seen how to create a feature pack, how can I distribute it to others?

## Distribution

Feature packs are distributed as tarballs. The tarball contains the entire contents of the feature pack's sub-directory, including the `devcontainer-feature.json`, `install.sh`, and any other files in the directory.

The [Open Container Initiative](https://opencontainers.org/), aka OCI, defines industry standards for containers and container resources. We treat feature packs as OCI Artifacts and use the concept of an [OCI Registry](https://containers.dev/implementors/features-distribution/#oci-registry) to distribute them.

> The [features template repository](https://github.com/devcontainers/feature-template) mentioned above includes a [GitHub Actions workflow](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/dev-container-publish) to automate the publishing process. It packages each feature into a tarball and publishes the assets as an OCI artifact to GHCR. Trigger the `release.yaml` workflow from the template repository by selecting it on the left of the repository’s Actions tab on GitHub. This will publish each feature to GHCR under the `<owner>/<repo>` namespace. A feature pack is only republished when the version property in its `devcontainer-feature.json` is updated.

Reviewer 3: "It packages each feature into a tarball..." 
Unclear if each feature gets its own tarball or if multiple features are packaged (bundled) into a single tarball.
"This will publish each feature to GHCR..."
Should this be "feature pack"? Could be interpreted to mean "features" are pulled out separately and published.
Maybe "The GitHub Action will publish the feature pack to GHCR under...."

Author: Updated here and throughout to no longer use "feature pack" - let me know what you think.

> **Note:** One manual step with GHCR is to mark the OCI [package as "public"](https://github.com/devcontainers/feature-template#marking-feature-public). This only has to be done once per feature pack. Private feature packs do not require this step and may be accessed as long as you’ve logged into the Docker CLI using the credentials for your registry.

### Sharing your features with the community

If you'd like your contributions to appear in the [VS Code Remote-Containers](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers) or [GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces) UI for dev container creation, you may do the following:

* Go to [devcontainers.github.io](https://github.com/devcontainers/devcontainers.github.io) (the GitHub repo backing [containers.dev](https://containers.dev))
* Open a PR to modify the [`collection-index.yml`](https://github.com/devcontainers/devcontainers.github.io/blob/gh-pages/_data/collection-index.yml) file

> ![Feature collections page of containers.dev](./features-collections.png)

Reviewer 3: This image is low res and only shows one collection. Maybe it can be removed and just include a link to the https://containers.dev/collections?

Author: Updated!

Reviewer 3: Still need to remove the image Markdown

Author: Thanks for catching, updated!

The source code of a Feature has two components: An install script (`install.sh`) and a configuration file (`devcontainer-feature.json`).

```
+-- feature
|    +-- devcontainer-feature.json
|    +-- install.sh
|    +-- (other files)

```

`install.sh`: The installation entry point script – it’s conceptually added as a layer of the image’s Dockerfile and executed during build-time. This entry point script can install tools such as languages (ruby) and tools (GitHub CLI).

`devcontainer-feature.json`: This contains metadata about the Feature, a set of options that can be passed to a Feature’s install script during installation, as well as "pieces" of devcontainer.json that will be merged into the final dev container. For example, if any Feature indicates `privileged`: true in their config, the entire dev container will be started with the `--privileged` flag.

> Features can be authored in a variety of languages, the most straightforward being shell scripts. If a Feature is authored in a different language, information about it should be included in the metadata so that users can make an informed choice about it.

Reviewer 4: I am not sure if this is a little misleading.  While the install.sh will run anything, if you wrote a feature in an interpreted language that wasn't present on the build machine, the code would fail to execute.

Author: I'll add what you mention to the note below, i.e.:

> **Note:** While the install.sh will run anything, if you wrote a feature in an interpreted language that wasn't present on the build machine, the code would fail to execute...

Reviewer: @joshspicer It's not so much the build machine as it is the container isn't it?  Install.sh runs during the build not locally.  So the thing to get across is if you use a node scruot, you need to be sure to acquire node as a part of your install.sh script.

Author: Updated to:

> Note: While install.sh will run Features in any language, if you wrote a Feature in an interpreted language that wasn't present in the dev container, the code would fail to execute. Be sure to acquire the language(s) you need as part of install.sh.

### Sharing your Features with the community

If you'd like your contributions to appear in the [VS Code Remote-Containers](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers) or [GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces) UI for dev container creation, you may do the following:

* Go to [devcontainers.github.io](https://github.com/devcontainers/devcontainers.github.io) (the GitHub repo backing [containers.dev](https://containers.dev))
* Open a PR to modify the [`collection-index.yml`](https://github.com/devcontainers/devcontainers.github.io/blob/gh-pages/_data/collection-index.yml) file

Once merged, your change will appear at [containers.dev/collections](https://containers.dev/collections).

![Feature collections page of containers.dev](./features-collections.png)

## What if my Feature should only install after another one?

> As a Feature author, you may find that your Feature should install before or after other Features. In your `devcontainer-feature.json`, you may use the `installsAfter` property to list Features that should execute before it.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps we could mention here to _first_ try without the property (we want the devcontainer cli to be able to intelligently pick an order).  This is a good property to use in cases where ordering explicitly matters, and the CLI won't be able to figure it out.

Author: Good call out. I added a note:

> **Note:** We recommend to first creating your Feature without `installsAfter` - the dev container CLI will attempt to intelligently pick an order to execute Features. But in cases where ordering explicitly matters and the CLI won't be able to figure it out, `installsAfter` is a good choice.

Reviewer 3: Any cases where CLI ordering isn't deterministic, and things would sometimes work and sometimes not?

Author: Described [here](https://containers.dev/implementors/features/#installation-order):

> By default, Features are installed on top of a base image in an order determined as optimal by the implementing tool.
> 
> If any of the following properties are provided in the Feature’s devcontainer-feature.json, or the user’s devcontainer.json, the order indicated by these propert(ies) are respected (with decreasing precedence).
> 
> 1. The overrideFeatureInstallOrder property in user’s devcontainer.json. Allows users to control the order of execution of their Features.
> 2. The installsAfter property defined as part of a Feature’s devcontainer-feature.json.

So tools implementing the spec, like Remote-Containers or Codespaces, may add logic to determine an optimal order.

Author: Removed the initial note mentioned above and instead added the content I listed here, as I think it's clearer.

> You should be sure that Features you release publicly check and install dependencies in addition to the Feature.

> Furthermore, public Features are very likely to be used from both arm64 or x86_64 machines - so be sure to adapt to this when possible.

You may review `devcontainer-feature.json` properties [in the spec](https://containers.dev/implementors/features/#devcontainer-feature-json-properties), along with public examples in the [devcontainers/features](https://github.com/devcontainers/features) repo.

Now that we’ve seen how to create a Feature, how can I distribute it to others?

## Distribution

Features are distributed as tarballs. The tarball contains the entire contents of the Feature sub-directory, including the `devcontainer-feature.json`, `install.sh`, and any other files in the directory.

The [Open Container Initiative](https://opencontainers.org/), aka OCI, defines industry standards for containers and container resources. We treat Features as OCI Artifacts and use the concept of an [OCI Registry](https://containers.dev/implementors/features-distribution/#oci-registry) to distribute Features.

> The [Features template repository](https://github.com/devcontainers/feature-template) mentioned above includes a [GitHub Actions workflow](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/dev-container-publish) to automate the publishing process. It packages each feature into a tarball and publishes the assets as an OCI artifact to GHCR. Trigger the `release.yaml` workflow from the template repository by selecting it on the left of the repository’s Actions tab on GitHub. This will publish each feature to GHCR under the `<owner>/<repo>` namespace. A Feature is only republished when the version property in its `devcontainer-feature.json` is updated.

Reviewer 3: Should we just talk about a single feature?
"It package the feature into a tarball...."
"This GitHub Action will publish the feature to GHCR...."

Author: I like this idea, updated.
